RULES ON DISCIPLINARY ACTION
CLASSIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES
Employee shall be classified as Permanent, Probationers, Tenure Based Scaled Contract, 
Temporary, Part-time, Casual and Associate (such as AA, RA) etc. 
1. Permanent Employee: means employee who has been confirmed in his post and has received 
a letter of confirmation from the Chief Administrative Officer or by the person authorised in 
this behalf by the Director after satisfactory completion of probation period of service with 
the Institute and whose name has been entered in the muster and who has been given an 
identity card.
2. Probationer Employee: means an employee who is provisionally employed on a trial basis 
to be considered for permanent vacancy or post and has not completed probationary period 
fixed for him in that behalf and who has not received a letter of confirmation in service from 
the Chief Administrative Officer or a person authorised in this behalf by the Director. The 
probationary period will be such as may be determined, and on expiry of the stipulated 
period of probation, the employee shall be deemed to continue on probation as a probationer.  
The Probationer shall be governed by the terms of his employment and by rules or orders 
expressly governing probationers. It is hereby expressly provided that benefit conferred under 
these regulations or any other rules framed by the Institute shall not apply to the probationer 
59
IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
unless otherwise expressly specified. Rules as regards hours of work and other regulations 
applicable for the discharge of his/her duty, shall, however, apply to the probationer.
3. Tenure Based Scaled Contract Employee: means an employee employed for a fixed tenure 
on the pay scale applicable in the Institute. Tenure period will be such as may be determined 
by the Institute. The Tenure Based Scaled Contract employee shall be governed by the terms 
of his employment and by rules or orders expressly governing them. It is hereby expressly 
provided that all benefits conferred under these regulations or any other rules framed by the 
Institute shall apply to the Tenure Based Scaled Contract employee unless explicitly specified. 
4. Temporary employee: means an employee who is appointed for a limited period for 
work which is essentially temporary or seasonal or a person who is employed temporarily 
as an additional employee to assist in a temporary increase in work Period of temporary 
employment of temporary workmen may be extended from time to time at the discretion 
of the Director depending upon exigencies of work. However, the total duration will not be 
more than two years, and at a time, the duration will not be more than one year. It is hereby 
expressly provided that benefit of leave or provident fund or any other benefits conferred 
under these regulations or any other Rules framed by the Institute shall not apply to temporary 
workmen, unless otherwise expressly specified. Regulations as regards hours of work and 
other Regulations applicable for the discharge of his duties shall however, apply to him. 
5. Part-time employee: means an employee who has been employed to work for only part of 
the day or during the hours other than those fixed for employees in general. 
6. Trainee means an employee other than a person who is appointed under the Apprentice Act, 
1961 and Apprentice (Amendment) Act, 1985, at the Institute with or without any allowances 
to learn a job and who is not a probationary or contract or temporary employee.
7. Apprentice: means a person who is appointed as an Apprentice under the Apprentice Act, 
1961 and Apprentice (Amendment) Act, 1985, and it also includes one who is employed with 
or without any allowance to learn a job and who is not a probationer or temporary staff.
8. Outsourced Employee: means an employee hired through an outsourcing agency / 
contractor providing manpower services to the Institute. The employees of the contractor, 
who has agreement with the Institute for providing services e.g. Security, House Keeping etc., 
will not be considered as outsourced employee. 
8. Academic Associate: means a person appointed to support the faculty in their varied 
academic activities. The appointment is maximum for five years on a contract with fixed pay. 
The Academic Associate is not entitled to any of the benefits and privileges of a permanent 
employee. They are governed by the terms of his employment and by rules or orders 
expressly governing them. It is hereby expressly provided that benefits conferred under these 
regulations or any other rules framed by the Institute shall not apply to them unless explicitly 
specified. Rules as regards hours of work and other regulations applicable for discharge of 
his/her duty, shall, however, apply to them.
9. Research Assistant/Associate: means a person appointed to assist the faculty in individual 
and group research, case writing, etc. They are not entitled to any of the benefits and privileges 
of a permanent employee. They are governed by the terms of his employment and by rules 
or orders expressly governing them. It is hereby expressly provided that benefit conferred 
60 IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
under these regulations or any other rules framed by the Institute shall not apply to them 
unless explicitly specified. Rules as regards hours of work and other regulations applicable 
for discharge of his/her duty, shall, however, apply to them.
If a permanent employee is employed as a probationer to new or higher post, he/she may, at any 
time, during the probationary period, be reverted to his original permanent post by an order in 
writing signed by the Director/Chief Administrative Officer or by any person authorised in this 
behalf.
The authority which appoints a member of the faculty and staff of the Institute, hereinafter referred 
to as ‘employee’ or person, may suspend, discharge, dismiss, or award any for the misconduct or 
for breach of the terms and conditions of his/her appointment. 
PENALTIES:
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other regulation, and without prejudice to such action 
to which an employee may become liable under any other regulation or law for the time being in 
force, the following penalties may (for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided) 
be imposed on any employee of the Institute.
MINOR PENALTIES:
1. censure;
2. withholding of his promotion;
3. recovery from; his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Institute 
by negligence or breach of orders;
a) 
Reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a period not exceeding 3years 
without cumulative effect and not adversely affecting his pension.
b) 
Withholding of increments of pay.
MAJOR PENALTIES:
1. As provided for in Regulation 3(a) above, reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for 
a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the employee of the Institute 
will earn increments of pay during the period of such Reduction and whether on the expiry of 
such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments 
of his pay;
2. reduction to a lower time-scale of pay or post which shall ordinarily be a bar to the promotion 
of the employee to the time-scale of pay or post from which he was reduced, with or without 
further directions regarding conditions of restoration to the post from which the employee of 
the Institute was reduced and his seniority and pay on such Restoration to that post;
3. (compulsory) retirement;
4. removal from service which shall not be disqualification for future employment under the 
Institute;
61
IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
5. dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment 
under the Institute
The following shall not constitute a penalty within the meaning of this regulation.
1. Discharge of an employee for failure to pass any examination or test or a medical test 
prescribed for fresh appointment to any category of post; compulsory retirement of an 
employee in accordance with the provision relating to superannuation or retirement;
2. Compulsory retirement of an employee by following the provision relating to superannuation 
or retirement;
3. Termination of service or reversion to a lower category or post of an employee appointed or 
promoted on probation either during or at the end of the period of probation;
4. Discharge of an employee under regulation 19 or as a measure of retrenchment for want of 
vacancy;
5. Termination of service of an employee employed under a contract or agreement as per the 
terms of such contract or agreement or in the case of an employee appointed for a specific 
period, at the end of such period;
6. Reversion of an employee promoted from a lower post to a higher post to such lower post for 
want of vacancy;
7. On-promotion of an employee after consideration of his case for promotion; whether on a 
regular or Tenure Based Scaled Contract or on ad-hoc basis to a post to which he is eligible 
for being considered;
8. Replacement of the services of an employee whose services had been borrowed at the disposal 
of his parent organization.
SUSPENSION:
The appointing authority or any authority to which it is subordinate or the disciplinary authority 
or any other authority empowered in that behalf by the Board, by general or special order, may 
place an employee under suspension:
1. where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or is pending or
2. where in the opinion of the authority aforesaid, he has engaged himself in activities prejudicial 
to the interest of the security of the State; or
3. where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, inquiry or 
trial:
Provided that, where the order of suspension is made by an authority lower than the 
appointing authority, such authority shall forthwith Report to the appointing authority the 
circumstances in which the order was made.
4. An employee shall be deemed to have been placed under suspension by order of appointing 
authority:
a) 
With effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether on a 
criminal charge or otherwise, for a period exceeding forty-eight hours.
62 IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
b) 
With effect from the date of his conviction, if in the event of a conviction for an 
offence, he is sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and 
is not forthwith dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired consequent on such 
conviction.
5. An employee who is placed under suspension shall, during the period of such suspension, be 
paid a subsistence allowance at the following rate, namely:
a) 
Where the enquiry contemplated or pending is departmental the subsistence 
allowance shall, for the first ninety days from the date of suspension, be equal to one 
half of the basic wage, dearness allowance and other compensatory allowances to 
which the employee would have been entitled if he/she was on leave with salary. If 
the departmental enquiry gets prolonged and the employee continues to be under 
suspension for a period exceeding ninety days, the subsistence allowance shall for 
such period be equal to three-fourths of such basic salary, dearness allowance and 
other compensatory allowance.
Provided that where such enquiry is prolonged beyond ninety days for reasons 
directly attributable to the employees, the subsistence allowance shall, for the period 
exceeding ninety days, be reduced to one-fourth of such basic salary, dearness 
allowance and other compensatory allowances.
b) Where the enquiry is by an outside agency or, as the case may be, where criminal 
proceedings against an employee are under investigation or trial, the subsistence allowance 
shall, for the first one hundred and eighty days from the date of suspension, be equal to one
half of his basic salary, dearness allowance and other compensatory allowances to which the 
employee would have been entitled to if he/she was on leave. If such enquiry or criminal 
proceeding gets prolonged and the employee continues to be under suspension for a period 
exceeding one hundred and eighty days, the subsistence allowance shall for such period be 
equal to three-fourths of such wage.
Provided that where such enquiry or criminal proceedings are prolonged beyond a period of 
one hundred and eighty days for reasons directly attributable to the employee the subsistence 
allowance shall, for the period exceeding one hundred and eighty days, be reduced to one
fourth of such salary.
ENQUIRY PROCEEDINGS:
1. In the enquiry, the employee shall be entitled to appear in person or to be represented by an 
employee of the Institute.
2. The proceedings of the enquiry shall be recorded in English. However, the Institute shall 
arrange for a Hindi or Gujarati translation of the proceedings at the request of the employee.
3. The proceedings of the enquiry shall generally be completed within three months:
Provided that the period of three months may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be 
extended by such further period as may be deemed necessary by the enquiry officer.
4. If on the conclusion of the enquiry or, as the case may be, of the criminal proceeding, the 
employee has been found guilty of the charges framed against him/her and it is considered, 
after giving the employee concerned a reasonable opportunity of making representation on 
the penalty proposed, that an order of dismissal or suspension or fine or stoppage of annual 
63
IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
increment or reduction in rank would meet the ends of justice, the competent authority shall 
pass an order accordingly.
Provided that where an order imposing fine or stoppage of annual increment or reduction in 
rank is passed under this clause, the employee shall be deemed to have been on duty during 
the period of suspension and shall be entitled to the same emoluments as he/she would have 
received if he/she had not been placed under suspension, after deducting the subsistence 
allowance paid to him/her for such period.
5. If on the conclusion of the enquiry, or as the case may be, of the criminal proceedings, the 
employee has been found to be not guilty of any of the charges framed against him/her, 
he/she shall be deemed to have been on duty during the period of suspension and shall be 
entitled to the same salary as he/she would have received if he/she had not been placed 
under suspension, after deducting the subsistence allowance paid to him/her for such period.
6. The payment of subsistence allowance under these rules shall be subject to the employee 
concerned not taking up any employment during the period of suspension.
7. In awarding punishment under this rule, the competent authority shall take into account 
the gravity of the misconduct, the previous record, if any, of the employee and any other 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances that may exist. A copy of the order passed by the 
competent authority shall be supplied to the employee concerned.
8. No order of discharge or dismissal shall be passed under the preceding rule unless the 
specific charges on which such order is to be passed, are framed against the person in 
writing, and given to the said person, so that he/she shall have reasonable opportunity to 
show cause why the proposed action should not be taken against him/her, and submitting 
an explanation in writing within such time as may be prescribed by the appointing authority; 
provided that the requirements may be waived if the facts on the basis of which action is to 
be taken, have been established in a court of law or where the person absconded remains 
absent without intimation for a period of not less than one month or where it is for any other 
reason impracticable to communicate with him/her. In every case where all or any of the 
requirements of this rule are waived, the reasons for so doing shall be recorded in writing.
APPEALS:
An employee who has been discharged or dismissed shall have a right to appeal against any order 
passed against him/her to an authority referred to as ‘Appellate Authority’ in Annexure I. Every 
appeal shall comply with the following requirements.
a) It shall be written in English, or, if not written in English, it shall be accompanied by a 
translation in English and shall be signed.
b) It shall be presented, in concise, polite language and be free from irrelevant matter.
c) It shall contain all material statements and arguments relied on and shall be complete in 
itself.
d) It shall specify the relief desired.
e) It shall be submitted to the authority which made the order appealed against within three 
months from the date on which the Appellant receives a copy of the order appealed against 
provided further that a copy of the appeal may be submitted directly to the appellate authority.
64 IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
f) It shall not be addressed to the authorities listed in Annexure I or to any member of the Board 
of Governors by name, and any such action shall be deemed a breach of discipline.
CONSIDERATION OF APPEALS
In the case of an appeal against an order of discharge or dismissal, the appellate authority shall 
consider:
a) Whether the procedure prescribed in the preceding paras has been complied with, and, if not, 
whether such non-compliance has resulted in a miscarriage of justice,
b) whether the findings are justified, and
c) whether the penalty imposed is excessive, adequate or inadequate and pass orders
i) setting aside, reducing, confirming, enhancing the penalty, or 
ii) remitting the case to the appointing authority with such direction as it may deem fit in the 
circumstances of the case.
Provided that the appellate authority shall not impose any enhanced penalty unless the 
appellant is given an opportunity of making any representation which he/she may wish to 
make against such an enhanced penalty.
IMPLEMENTATION OF ORDERS IN APPEAL
The authority which made the order appealed against shall give effect to the orders passed by the 
appellate authority.
REVIEW OF ORDERS IN DISCIPLINARY CASES
The authority specified in Annexure I before which an appeal against an order imposing any of 
the penalties, may of its own motion or otherwise, call for the records of the case in a disciplinary 
proceeding, review any order passed in such a case, and pass such orders as it deems fit as if the 
employee had preferred an appeal against such an order. No such review will be undertaken three 
months after the date of the order to be reviewed.
BOARD’S POWER TO REVIEW
1. Notwithstanding anything contained above, the Board of Governors may, on its own motion, 
after calling for the records of the case, review any order which is made or is appealable 
under these rules.
2. An employee who has been discharged or dismissed or imposed any of the punishments by an 
order passed by the Board of Governors, can make a request to the Board for reconsideration 
of its decision, within one month from the date of receipt of the decision of the Board of 
Governors. The Board after reconsideration may arrange to communicate its decision to the 
employee concerned. Once such reconsideration is communicated the decision of the Board 
will be final. No further appeal will lie against such a decision of the Board.
65
IIMA HR Policy Manual 2023
PAY AND ALLOWANCES ON ACQUITTAL
If an employee of the Institute has been discharged or dismissed and charges are not proved 
against him/her, the appellate authority may grant him/her for the period of absence from duty
a) if he/she is fully exonerated, the full pay to which he/she would have been entitled if he/
she had not been discharged or dismissed, and by an order to be separately recorded, any 
allowance of which he/she was in receipt prior to his/her discharge or dismissal,
or
b) if not fully exonerated, such proportion of such pay and allowances as the appellate authority 
may prescribe.
The period of absence from duty will be treated as period spent on duty in case of (a) above 
and it will not be treated as period spent on duty in case of (b) above unless the appellate 
authority directs to the contrary.
PROCEDURE FOR DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS AFTER RETIREMENT:
Any disciplinary proceeding, if instituted by issue of charge sheet while the employee was in 
service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall, after the retirement 
of the employee, be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced, in 
the same manner, as if the employee had continued in service. Such proceeding after retirement 
should be completed expeditiously and within twelve months from the date of delivery of charge 
sheet to the charged official, subject to Court Orders, if any. During the pendency of the disciplinary 
proceedings, the disciplinary authority may withhold payment of gratuity for ordering the recovery 
from gratuity of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Institute.  If the employee 
is found in a disciplinary proceedings or judicial proceedings to have been guilty of offence or 
misconduct as mentioned in the relevant Sections of the Payment of the Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 
of 1972) or to have caused pecuniary loss to the Institute by misconduct or negligence during 
his service, including service rendered on deputation or on re-employment after retirement, 
provided that the provisions of relevant Sections of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 shall be 
kept in view in the event of delayed payment, in case, the employee is fully exonerated